Asynchronous publishing + Release pipelines (#1408)
dotnet/arcade: Documentation/CorePackages/AsyncPublishing.md

- **Outputs are isolated** - Build outputs should not initially mix with other build outputs.
- **Outputs don't always need to be public** - For security, stabilized, or other internal builds, final publishing should happen to internal locations, rather than public locations.
- **Publishing steps can vary based on build intent (assigned channel)** - .NET Core 3 models build intent by assigned channel. Depending on what channel a build is assigned to, publishing steps can vary. Publishing happens when build intent is declared (channel assignment).
- **All build outputs are private by default**

## Final Workflow
The final desired workflow is intended to utilize a few key pieces of infrastructure to achieve the stated goals:
- Azure DevOps release pipelines to perform release activities
- BAR/Maestro for release pipeline triggering
- Isolated blob feeds (eventually Azure DevOps feeds + additional artifact storage) for per-build storage

The final workflow is as follows:

> 1. Each leg of a build that wants to publish outputs uses the arcade publishing package to push outputs. These outputs are sent to an intermediate, isolated and private storage feed (see below for options). As outputs are pushed, the package records metadata about each item in a manifest which is also pushed for later use. The manifest identifies any such information that may be needed to perform subsequent release activities.  This manifest should look like:

Reviewer: I love and hate manifests. Manifests are great because it gives you a rich way to store metadata and a bill of materials that you can check, but there is a high cost with producing these. It means we need tools to produce and consume, we need to make sure the tools are tested and the manifest format is compatible with different versions and implementations of manifest-reading tools. etc. It also means you may have to hand-edit the manifest if the build created it incorrectly; not necessarily a bad thing...but just another factor to consider.

Just my 2 cents: aspnet has been using folders to categorize build artifacts, and so far it has been sufficient. If something like this is sufficient for everyone else and saves us the cost of implementing manifest tooling, then I think it's worth considering.
```
artifacts/Release/packages/product/   = packages that should ship to nuget.org
artifacts/Release/packages/internal/  = packages that ship to internal feeds only, use to transport bits to partner teams

artifacts/Release/assets/product/     = files that go to blob storage for customers to consume
artifacts/Release/assets/internal/    = files just for us
```

Author: That's certainly another option.  The only issue is whether you can (sanely) represent the full breadth of what we need to do based simply on the folder structure.

Reviewer: > (sanely) represent the full breadth of what we need to do based simply on the folder structure.

Yeah, that's the argument in favor of having a manifest. Might be good to flesh out the scenarios. ProdCon v1 manifests such as [this one](https://github.com/dotnet/versions/blob/master/build-info/dotnet/product/cli/release/2.2.0/build.xml) are probably a good place to start.

Author: We already produce a prodcon v1 manifest as part of each leg of the build.  These get joined at the end so that the info may be provided to the BAR.

Author: I'll make it clearer that we're looking to maintain the same manifest.

Reviewer: Ok, sounds good.

    - **Include** - Which bits 'ship' vs. those which are just inter-repo transport.

>     - **Include** - Eventual output locations (e.g. cli blob storage, cli checksum storage, dotnet core nuget feed) to be interpreted by the release pipelines.

Reviewer: Can you provide an example of the difference between this and the next line? I'm wondering if the metadata should be even more abstract, like "IsInternalPackage" or "PackageType=npm". Specifying blob and nuget feeds still seems like a detail for the release pipeline to worry about.

Author: That's actually exactly what we have today.  There is a manifest produced after each leg and contains information like:
- NonShipping=true/false.

It may include other bits of info already (like target storage accounts or feeds), but basically we'd in phase 2 of implementation we'd change that over to abstract those specific output location details into less specific notation: e.g. "checksums" vs. "dotnetclichecksums/foobar/x/y".  The release pipeline will know to interpret "checksums" as "dotnetclichecksums/foobar/x/y" for a public release, and some other storage account for an internal release.

6. Any time a new channel is associated with a build, a release pipeline for that channel may be run. This allows for the promotion of builds through channels (e.g. internal dev build -> public release build)

*Note: This plan allows for a backup release strategy, where a release pipeline may be triggered on a build manually by a user. The same release pipeline would work with or without the Maestro, though additional output locations may not be records*

### Options for intermediate feeds
Intermediate feeds used for the build could take a number of forms:
- Blob Feeds
    - Advantages - Can be used as a nuget feed. Can serve flat files. Long retention times.
    - Disadvantages - Not implicitly associated with a build. Auth can be clunky (SAS tokens/storage account keys)

> - Azure DevOps build storage

Reviewer: I'm in favor of using this because solutions for the mentioned disadvantages are easy.

For example, you could setup a release pipeline for that triggers on every build. This pipeline pushes packages to an internal nuget feed and/or Azure blob storage or drop shares (yay for infinite retention). The same pipeline (or a separate one if you wish) can be used to flow artifacts to other feeds.

Pipelines have a lot of great features to allow fine-grained control of release automation base on branches, manual approvals, specific build tags, etc, so I think we can make this work without implementing our own intermediate storage mechanism.

Author: Okay, noted.  I think you're right.  For now, I think the roadmap is the same, and that ends up just being an implementation detail later on

    - Advantages - Implicitly associated with a specific build. Built in auth (AD auth). Can be accessed from UI.
    - Disadvantages - Can't be used as a nuget feed. Retention is limited.

> Until it becomes clear that using Azure DevOps build storage for pre-release storage is a better option, blob feeds should be used as intermediate storage for build outputs. If necessary, outputs could be duplicated (e.g. upload manifest to both blob feed and build storage).

Reviewer: Suggest changing to "Until it's clear Azure DevOps build storage is insufficient, let's used it and avoid the cost of implementing our own intermediate blob storage for build outputs."

In the second phase, we will move the rest of existing publishing (blobs and symbols) for day to day development into the public dev release.  This involves:

1. Altering the public dev release pipeline to enable publishing of symbols to mdsl, symweb, as well as regular blobs (e.g. installers).  We should use existing arcade tasks do this.
2. Altering the arcade publishing package to stop explicit publishing of those items during the build, instead moving these to push to intermediate storage first.  Examples:
    - Remove PublishSymbols call from publish.proj
    - Alter PushToBlobFeed to do appropriate things when pushing flat files.  Flat files should go to the intermediate storage first, then to final locations (categories of output locations are noted in the manifest, actual output locations are defined by the release pipeline).

### Phase 3 - Introduce additional piplines for internal and stable releases
In the third phase, we will introduce additional release pipelines for other scenarios:
- Internal only - Push to common, authenticated Azure DevOps feed rather than regular dotnet-core feed.  Output blob storage should only be a private common location.

> - Stable only (may be internal) - Push to predictable locations that can be deleted and recreated as necessary. The analog to this today would be stabilized ProdCon v1 blob feeds, which are based on a "product build id".  The feed can be deleted and recreated so that packages with identical versions can be re-uploaded.

Reviewer: For your consideration -- you can use build tags to represent stable vs non-stable builds. Release pipelines allow you to filter on artifact tags. 

Example:
https://github.com/aspnet/Extensions/blob/815526c45fed4cbdcf037522f504149a01147975/build/repo.targets#L6-L9
https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_releaseDefinition?definitionId=11&_a=environments-editor-preview

Look at the artifact and trigger filters that use tags...

Author: I like that idea

# Asynchronous Publishing and Releasing in .NET Core 3
This document describes changes to publishing to support asynchronicity and ready the engineering system for future servicing of .NET Core 3.

## Current State
Currently, publishing is done in one of two ways by each repo:
- **Use of Arcade to do publishing** - Repository selects what kinds of assets need publishing (e.g. symbols, flat files, packages), provides targets and keys for the output locations (e.g. blob feed URL + storage key) and Arcade's publish package handles the ferrying of outputs to the target locations. During this publishing, Arcade records a manifest of the outputs.  At the final join point in the build (e.g. Windows and Linux are both done), the build joins all manifests and uploads the build information to the Build Asset Registry (BAR). 

> - **Existing non-Arcade publishing tasks** - Repository uses some existing tasks (e.g. from buildtools, or custom within the repo's build infrastructure) and publishes what it needs to various feeds and output storage accounts.  The outputs are not tracked.

Reviewer 2: >   [](start = 227, length = 2)

Nit: double space

Typically these publishing steps are done unconditionally on each official build.

## Problems
The two approaches above are roughly equivalent, with more tracability and integration into the Maestro/BAR in the Arcade approach. Over time as repositories onboard onto Arcade, it is expected that non-standard publishing workflows will disappear. However, there are still significant issues with the current Arcade approach.

> - **Blob feed publishing is lock heavy** - Most repositories are using a single feed target for blob feed publishing (https://dotnetfeed.blob.core.windows.net/dotnet-core/index.json). The tooling that mimics nuget pushes on top of Azure storage requires a lock when pushing. When multiple builds are attempting to push to the same feed at the same time, only one may push at a time. This leads to significant wait times to finish publishing, potentially causing builds to time out.

Reviewer 3: I already got some answers from reading the rest of the text.

- **Outputs are always public** - Because most repositories are pushing to public endpoints (e.g. dotnetfeed, myget, etc.) on every build, the onus is on the maintainer of the build or queuer of a manual build to understand the right buttons or switches to press (if available) in cases where outputs should not be made public. For example:
    - Security releases cannot be made public until day of release.  They cannot be placed on public output locations.
    - Stabilized (non-suffixed) builds need to be built to isolated locations so they can be iterated upon before final release. Pushing to non-isolated public locations invalidates the ability to iterate because overwrite rules are often strict.
- **Build intention must be known prior to build** - Because most outputs are being published publicly by default during the build, repo owners are essentially declaring the intent of a build at the time of the build.  Every build is a public dev build. This is fundamentally wrong, and inconsistent with how we ship software.

## Goals

> The improved publishing story has the following goals

Reviewer 2: >s [](start = 52, length = 1)

Missing ':'

- **Publishing is largely lock free** - Build completion should not be blocked on other builds' actions.

> - **Publishing is fast** - Reduce much of the publishing time in builds by moving expensive steps elsewhere. For example, core-setup's publishing steps to myget and the dotnet-core blob feed take about 40 minutes, about as long as the rest of the build.

Reviewer 3: It's clear to me how we are going to remove the need for locks and that will improve builds timing out due to lock contention. However, is it the goal to improve publishing time when the lock is not contended, right? If so, I didn't got how the performance in that case will be improved.

Author: If we switch to using azure Devops storage for the outputs of the build (rather than blob feeds), there is no lock at build time.  There will be a lock at release pipeline time, but that is not seen by the developer.

> - **Outputs are isolated** - Build outputs should not initially mix with other build outputs.

Reviewer 2: >Build outputs should not initially mix with other build outputs [](start = 29, length = 63)

What are these two kinds of outputs?

Author: Should be "outputs of other builds"

- **Outputs don't always need to be public** - For security, stabilized, or other internal builds, final publishing should happen to internal locations, rather than public locations.

> - **Publishing steps can vary based on build intent (assigned channel)** - .NET Core 3 models build intent by assigned channel. Depending on what channel a build is assigned to, publishing steps can vary. Publishing happens when build intent is declared (channel assignment).

Reviewer 2: >Publishing happens when build intent is declared [](start = 205, length = 48)

Currently we are recommending that all subscriptions are "Latest" channeled. I don't remember if the channel is required when creating a new subscription, but in case it isn't, that would mean that channel-less subscriptions won't publish?

Author: Subscriptions are sourced from a channel.  Builds are applied to a channel.  Most builds of typical branches will automatically be applied to a channel (e.g. arcade's master goes to .NET Tools - Latest).  This means that if a build of some random branch isn't applied to a channel it won't publish.  But that is intentional.

- **All build outputs are private by default**

## Final Workflow
The final desired workflow is intended to utilize a few key pieces of infrastructure to achieve the stated goals:
- Azure DevOps release pipelines to perform release activities
- BAR/Maestro for release pipeline triggering
- Isolated blob feeds (eventually Azure DevOps feeds + additional artifact storage) for per-build storage

The final workflow is as follows:

> 1. Each leg of a build that wants to publish outputs uses the Arcade publishing package to push outputs. These outputs are sent to an intermediate, isolated and private storage feed (see below for options). As outputs are pushed, the package records metadata about each item in a manifest which is also pushed for later use. The manifest identifies any such information that may be needed to perform subsequent release activities. This manifest should look much like it does today, with some tweaks:

Reviewer 3: `in a manifest which is also pushed for later use` you mean pushed to a remote intermediate storage (like an storage account) or just put somewhere to be consumed by the item (2 - At the finalization point..) below?

> 1. Each leg of a build that wants to publish outputs uses the arcade publishing package to push outputs. These outputs are sent to an intermediate, isolated and private storage feed (see below for options). As outputs are pushed, the package records metadata about each item in a manifest which is also pushed for later use. The manifest identifies any such information that may be needed to perform subsequent release activities. This manifest should look much like it does today, with some tweaks:

Reviewer 2: >arcade [](start = 62, length = 6)

We are using "Arcade" elsewhere

    - **Include** - Which bits 'ship' vs. those which are just inter-repo transport.
    - **Include** - Categories/generalized names for output locations to be interpreted by the release pipelines. Examples:
        - 'SDK blob storage'
        - 'SDK checksum storage'
        - '.NET Core Nuget Package'
    - **Do not include** - Specific storage accounts or resources. For example, the manifest should not identify the specific 'dotnetcli' storage account as the target for blobs, as an internal CLI release will want to push to an internal dev release account, while a public dev release will push to the dotnetcli storage account. These details should be abstracted in a way that allows for interpretation based on the *intent* of the build.
2. At the finalization join point in the build, the BAR/Maestro build upload happens. This joins the manifests from various legs into one, then provides that information to Maestro/BAR. Initially, the build assets locations are recorded as their intermediate locations.

> 3. Maestro/BAR associates the build with a specific channel. This can happen either automatically, via a default repo+branch->channel mapping, or manually for a specific build by a user.

Reviewer 3: Just throwing some thoughts.. would make sense be able to assign a build to multiple channels?

Author: Yes, you can do this today. Typically automatic assignment would only happen to one channel though.

> 4. Each channel may have a release pipeline associated with it. If a pipeline is associated with the channel, Maestro/BAR triggers the release pipeline associated with the channel on the build that was just assigned to the channel. Maestro waits until this release is done to do any additional actions, like subscription updates.

Reviewer 3: Same as above - would it make sense to have multiple pipelines assigned to a channel? :-)

Author: I called out that we could have multiple release pipelines.  I don't think this is strictly necessary, but it would make sense for the purposes of transitioning to new pipelines (testing a replacement).

> 4. Each channel may have a one ore more release pipelines associated with it. If a pipeline is associated with the channel, Maestro/BAR triggers the release pipeline associated with the channel on the build that was just assigned to the channel. Maestro waits until this release is done to do any additional actions, like subscription updates.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Each channel may have one or more release pipelines associated with it. If a pipeline is associated with the channel, Maestro/BAR triggers the release pipeline associated with the channel on the build that was just assigned to the channel. Maestro waits until this release is done to do any additional actions, like subscription updates.
```

> 5. The release pipeline associated with the new build uses the artifacts from the build (one of which is the manifest) to process and push the outputs of this build to appropriate locations. At the end of the release pipeline, new outputs locations (e.g. myget, nuget, etc.) and potentially new assets (e.g. checksums) are added to the build's assets. *Note: These new assets can be applied to subscription updates as subscription actions will not have taken place until the build is through the release pipeline.*

Reviewer 2: >The release pipeline associated with the new build [](start = 3, length = 50)

Is the idea to trigger the release per build? If not, there might be an edge case where the build associated with the release might not be there anymore since we only retain a few (I think 5) latest

Reviewer 2: I think #6 answers my question

---
In reply to: [237601214](https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/pull/1408#discussion_r237601214) [](ancestors = 237601214)

Author: Yes, per build.

6. Any time a new channel is associated with a build, a release pipeline for that channel may be run. This allows for the promotion of builds through channels (e.g. internal dev build -> public release build)

*Note: This plan allows for a backup release strategy, where a release pipeline may be triggered on a build manually by a user. The same release pipeline would work with or without the Maestro, though additional output locations may not be recorded*

### Options for intermediate feeds
Intermediate feeds used for the build could take a number of forms:
- Blob Feeds
    - Advantages - Can be used as a nuget feed. Can serve flat files. Long retention times.
    - Disadvantages - Not implicitly associated with a build. Auth can be clunky (SAS tokens/storage account keys)
- Azure DevOps build storage
    - Advantages - Implicitly associated with a specific build. Built in auth (AD auth). Can be accessed from UI.
    - Disadvantages - Can't be used as a nuget feed. Retention is limited.

> Today blob feeds are used as intermediate storage. We should transition to using Azure DevOps build storage. Because Azure DevOps allows for identification of artificats during the build using artifact logging commands (https://github.com/Microsoft/azure-pipelines-tasks/blob/master/docs/authoring/commands.md#artifact-logging-commands) this transition can be made transparent to a repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today blob feeds are used as intermediate storage. We should transition to using Azure DevOps build storage. Because Azure DevOps allows for identification of artifacts during the build using artifact logging commands (https://github.com/Microsoft/azure-pipelines-tasks/blob/master/docs/authoring/commands.md#artifact-logging-commands) this transition can be made transparent to a repository.
```

hehe, artificats 😸

## Implementation Roadmap
It is an explicit goal to make this transition to a new system of publishing as painless as possible. For typical user scenarios, developers should notice little difference in day to day operations. Required repository changes should be minimized or eliminated if possible. The implementation of this new system should proceed in phases.

### Phase 1 - Remove lock contention and introduce public dev release pipelines for feeds only
The first phase is intended to remove the "Waiting for exclusive lock on the feed" issues seen in the builds, as well as set up for phase 2. To implement this phase, the following steps will be taken:

> 1. Introduce an Azure DevOps release pipeline concept into Maestro/Bar. Release pipelines are associated with a channel. Upon assignment of a build to a channel, if that channel has an associated release pipeline, the release pipeline should be triggered for the build. Execution of additional post-build actions (e.g. subscription updates) will block on the completion of the release pipeline.

Reviewer: Clarification question. What will trigger the release pipelines? Will Maestro triggered via API calls? Or will we use the built-in triggers in Azure Pipelines to run the release pipelines when builds complete?

Author: API calls upon channel assignment (see 4 in the final workflow).  Channel assignment identifies build intention, and thus the BAR will trigger the release automatically. In rare cases where you need to do some manual release, you could also do it through the UI.

Reviewer: As long as it's reasonable to view and manage these triggers, that's fine with me. I don't know what you have planned for Mission Control and Maestro, but would be nice to have UI for this since we won't be using Azure Pipelines UI for trigger management.

2. Introduce the ability for build assets to have multiple locations, and for those locations to be added to (additive only) at the end of the release pipeline. Additionally, new assets may be added.
3. Create a 'public dev release' Azure DevOps pipeline which pushes outputs from a build to a blob feed based on the build manifest. For now, the manifest should record that the current ExpectedFeedUrl is the target of the release pipeline, and the source is the intermediate feed used. At the end of the release pipeline, the BAR should be updated with the new asset locations.

> 4. Change PushToBlobFeed to upload package artifacts to Azure DevOps build storage rather than ExpectedFeedUrl. Initially, only nuget packages should be pushed. Using artifact logging commands (https://github.com/Microsoft/azure-pipelines-tasks/blob/master/docs/authoring/commands.md#artifact-logging-commands) this should be doable without disruptive changes in the repository. The initial upload to the BAR should note the direct link to each package within Azure DevOps build storage.

Author: Yeah that's the point of adding new locations.  The old links may be broken over time.  Technically, that should be the same for blob storage, we just don't happen to delete those nearly as often.

At the end of this, when a build is done, it pushes its nuget packages to the private intermediate feed, then uploads to BAR as usual. As the build associates with a channel, the associated release pipeline will run, pushing the outputs to the final feed (typically dotnet-core blob feed). Developers will not see "Waiting for exclusive lock on the feed" except in cases where multiple legs of the same build are publishing to the intermediate feed at the same time. This is relatively rare.

### Phase 2 - Move additional publishing steps into public dev release pipelines
In the second phase, we will move the rest of existing publishing (blobs and symbols) for day to day development into the public dev release. This involves:

> 1. Altering the public dev release pipeline to enable publishing of symbols to mdsl, symweb, as well as regular blobs (e.g. installers). We should use existing Arcade tasks do this.

Reviewer 4: `mdsl` => `msdl`, but it also seems like this:

> enable publishing of symbols to mdsl, symweb, as well as regular blobs (e.g. installers).

might read as publishing blobs to msdl. I don't think msdl + symweb need to be called out here. This seems much easier to read to me:

```suggestion
1. Altering the public dev release pipeline to enable symbol and blob (e.g. installer) publishing. We should use existing Arcade tasks do this.
```

2. Altering the arcade publishing package to stop explicit publishing of those items during the build, instead moving these to push to intermediate storage (Azure DevOps build storage) first.  Examples:
    - Remove PublishSymbols call from publish.proj
    - Alter PushToBlobFeed to do appropriate things when pushing flat files. Flat files should go to the intermediate storage first, then to final locations (categories of output locations are noted in the manifest, actual output locations are defined by the release pipeline).

> ### Phase 3 - Introduce additional piplines for internal and stable releases

Reviewer 2: >piplines [](start = 35, length = 8)

pipelines
